[ACR-1581] Add Diagnostics API guide for native applications (#1241)
Samsung/tizen-docs: docs/application/native/guides/device/diagnostics.md

# Diagnostics

Diagnostics API is used to collect data from applications and services. This API also allows you to read crash reports if a process in the system crashes.

**Figure: Diagnostics overall architecture**

![Diagnostics overall architecture](media/diag-arch.png)

## Prerequisites

To enable your application to use Diagnostics API:

1. To use Diagnostics API to collect diagnostics data, the application must be signed with a platform level distributor certificate.

   To sign application with a platform level certificate:

   1. In Tizen Studio, select **Tools > Certificate Manager**.
   2. To add a new certificate profile, click **+** in the Certificate Manager window.

      ![Add a new profile](media/diag-add-new-profile.png)

   3. Enter the profile name and click **Next**.

      ![Enter the profile name](media/diag-set-profile-name.png)

   4. Select **Select an existing author certificate** and click **Next**.

      ![Select **Select an existing author certificate**](media/diag-select-author-cert.png)

>    5. Choose the author certificate from the disk using the **Browse**. Enter password if needed. Click **Next**.

Reviewer: Suggest rephrasing to:

```suggestion
   5. Select an author certificate from the disk using **Browse**. Enter the password if needed and click **Next**.
```

      ![Choose the author certificate](media/diag-choose-tizen-author-cert.png)

   6. Select **Select a distributor certificate for an another app store** and click **Next**.

      ![Select **Select a distributor certificate for an another app store**](media/diag-select-distributor-cert.png)

>    7. Choose the distributor certificate from the disk using **Browse**. Enter the password and click **Finish**.

Reviewer: Suggest changing it to the second suggestion given by @mijin85cho:

```suggestion
   7. Click **Browse** and select the distributor certificate. Enter the password and click **Finish**.
```

# Diagnostics API

Diagnostics API is used to collect data from applications and services. This API also allows you to read crash reports if a process in the system crashes.

**Figure: Diagnostics API overall architecture**

![Diagnostics API overall architecture](media/diag-arch.png)

## Prerequisites

To enable your application to use Diagnostic API:

> 1.  To use Diagnostics API to collect diagnostics data, the application must be signed with a platform level distributor certificate.

Reviewer: Global: Please remove extra space after the number:

```suggestion
1. To use Diagnostics API to collect diagnostics data, the application must be signed with a platform level distributor certificate.
```

   To be able to sign application with a platform level certificate:

   1. Open Certificate Manager in the Tizen Studio which is available in the **Tools** menu.

>    2. To add a new certificate profile, click **+** in the Certificate Manager.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   2. To add a new certificate profile, click **+** in the Certificate Manager window.
```

      ![Add a new profile](media/diag-add-new-profile.png)

>    3. Enter the profile name.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   3. Enter the profile name and click **Next**.
```

      ![Enter the profile name](media/diag-set-profile-name.png)

>    4. Select **Select an existing author certificate**.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   4. Select **Select an existing author certificate** and click **Next**.
```

        ![Select **Select an existing author certificate**](media/diag-select-author-cert.png)

    5.  Choose the **author certificate** from the disk using the **Browse** button.

        ![Choose the author certificate](media/diag-choose-tizen-author-cert.png)

    6.  Select **Select a distributor certificate for an another app store**.

        ![Select **Select a distributor certificate for an another app store**](media/diag-select-distributor-cert.png)

    7.  Choose the **distributor certificate** from the disk using the **Browse** button.

        ![Choose the distributor certificate](media/diag-choose-tizen-distributor-cert.png)

        This newly added profile appears in the profile list.

>     8.  Close the window by clicking **Close** button.

Reviewer: To follow Google Style Guide and to maintain consistency with other pages:

```suggestion
    8. Click the **Close** button. to lose the window.
```

      ![Newly added profile](media/diag-finish.png)

2. To use functions and data types of Diagnostics API, include the `<diagnostics.h>` header file in your application:

   ```cpp
   #include <diagnostics.h>
   ```

## Crash reports

> Diagnostics API allows you to read the crash reports in case the process in the system fails. To do so, you must register the callback that will be called when the crash report is created:

Author: I meant here any process. Maybe it would be enough to write "in case process fails". "System process" sounds as if it was about some system-related process, but it could by any application.

> Diagnostics API allows you to read the crash reports in case the process in the system fails. To do so, you must register the callback that will be called when the crash report is created:

Reviewer 2: @mmoscicki2 I agree with your concern, as I was asking your check with same doubt. "in case process fails" would be enough in this case.

```cpp
void crash_callback(diagnostics_ctx_h ctx, void *user_data)
{

>     [...]

Reviewer 2: Global.
I think only "..." would be enough.

```suggestion
    ...
```

}

int register_callback(void *user_data)
{
    return diagnostics_set_notification_cb(crash_callback, user_data);
}
```

> [!NOTE]
> To deregister the callback use:
> ```
> diagnostics_unset_notification_cb();
> ```

> In case a new crash report is created, callback is called. To read the content of the crash report use `diagnostics_get_data(...)`:

Reviewer: Question, is there a reason to give dots in the bracket?
Could we leave it to:

In case a new crash report is created, callback is called. To read the content of the crash report use `diagnostics_get_data()`:

```cpp
void crash_callback(diagnostics_ctx_h ctx, void *user_data)
{
    diagnostics_data_h data;
    const char *params[] = {"cs_info_json"};

    int ret = diagnostics_get_data(ctx, params, 1, &data);
    if (ret != DIAGNOSTICS_ERROR_NONE)
        return;

    [...]
}
```

Using the `params` argument it is possible to specify, which data must be read from the crash report. Currently, the proper values are:

> -   `"cs_info_json"`: JSON report is returned, which contains information about crashed process (callstack, mapped memory regions, and so on).

Reviewer 2: Would you please check below suggestion?

-   `"cs_info_json"`: JSON report is returned, which contains information about crashed process such as callstack, mapped memory regions, and so on.

-   `"cs_full"`: Full crash report ZIP archive is collected.

The obtained data is associated with the `data` Diagnostics handler. To read the data content, you must use `diagnostics_data_read()`:

```cpp
void crash_callback(diagnostics_ctx_h ctx, void *user_data)
{
    diagnostics_data_h data;
    const char *params[] = {"cs_info_json"};

    int ret = diagnostics_get_data(ctx, params, 1, &data);
    if (ret != DIAGNOSTICS_ERROR_NONE)
        return;

    char buff[0x1000];
    int timeout_ms = 0;
    size_t bytes_read;

    for (;;) {
        ret = diagnostics_data_read(data, buff, sizeof(buff), timeout_ms, &bytes_read);
        if (ret == DIAGNOSTICS_ERROR_TRY_AGAIN)
            continue;

        if (ret != DIAGNOSTICS_ERROR_NONE)
            break; // error occured

        if (bytes_read == 0)
            break; // no more data to read

        fwrite(buff, 1, bytes_read, stdout); // write received data to the STDOUT
    }
}
```

## Diagnostic data request

> Diagnostics API can be used to request data from other application or service, especially for the diagnostic data that for various reasons cannot or must not be saved in the logs, such as binary or in custom format data, large volume data, reports that are time-consuming to create, and so on.

Reviewer 2: Here I have below suggestion. @surbhig12 would you please also check?

```suggestion
Diagnostics API also can request data from other application or service, especially the diagnostic data that for various reasons cannot or must not be saved in the logs, such as binary or in custom format data, large volume data, reports that are time-consuming to create, and so on.
```

To do so, you must call `diagnostics_request_client_data()`. The `client_id` variable must be the id of the process that supports Diagnostics API requests:

```cpp
void request_data()
{
    const char *client_id = "org.tizen.some_service";
    diagnostics_data_h data;
    const char *params[] = {"custom_parameter"};

    int ret = diagnostics_request_client_data(client_id, params, 1, &data);
    if (ret != DIAGNOSTICS_ERROR_NONE)
        return;

    char buff[0x1000];
    int timeout_ms = 0;
    size_t bytes_read;

    for (;;) {
        ret = diagnostics_data_read(data, buff, sizeof(buff), timeout_ms, &bytes_read);
        if (ret == DIAGNOSTICS_ERROR_TRY_AGAIN)
            continue;

        if (ret != DIAGNOSTICS_ERROR_NONE)
            break; // error occured

        if (bytes_read == 0)
            break; // no more data to read

        fwrite(buff, 1, bytes_read, stdout); // write received data to the STDOUT
    }
}
```

> If `diagnostics_request_client_data()` returns successfully, the obtained data can be read by `diagnostics_read_data()`.

Reviewer 2: Just a question.

In the code, we have `diagnostics_data_read()`.
However in this description, `diagnostics_read_data()` is introduced.

Would you please check this mismatch?

Author: the description is wrong

# Diagnostics API

Diagnostics API is used to collect data from applications and services, and allows to read crash reports if a process in the system crashes.

**Figure: Diagnostics API overall architecture**

![Diagnostics API overall architecture](media/diag-arch.png)

## Prerequisites

1.  To use Diagnostics API to collect diagnostics data, the application must be signed with a platform level distributor certificate.

    To be able to sign application with a platform level certificate:

>     1.  Open Certificate Manager in the Tizen Studio which is available in the **Tools** menu.

Author: You mean using one space between the numer and the text?

    2.  To add a new certificate profile, click **+** in the Certificate Manager.

        ![Add a new profile](media/diag-add-new-profile.png)

    3.  Enter the profile name.

        ![Enter the profile name](media/diag-set-profile-name.png)

    4.  Select the option **Select an existing author certificate**.

        ![Select the option **Select an existing author certificate**](media/diag-select-author-cert.png)

    5.  Choose the **author certificate** from the disk using the **Browse** button.

        ![Choose the author certificate](media/diag-choose-tizen-author-cert.png)

>     6.  Select the option **Select a distributor certificate for an another app store**.

Reviewer: Please change to:

Select **Select a distributor certificate for an another app store**.

        ![Select the option **Select a distributor certificate for an another app store**](media/diag-select-distributor-cert.png)

    7.  Choose the **distributor certificate** from the disk using the **Browse** button.

        ![Choose the distributor certificate](media/diag-choose-tizen-distributor-cert.png)

>     8.  Newly added profile should be visible in the profiles list. Close the window by clicking **Close** button.

Reviewer: This is a step result and not a step. Suggestion:

7.  Choose the **distributor certificate** from the disk using the **Browse** button.
    ![Choose the distributor certificate](media/diag-choose-tizen-distributor-cert.png)
     The newly added profile appears in the profiles list. 

8. Click the **Close** button to close the window.

        ![Newly added profile](media/diag-finish.png)

2.  To use functions and data types of Diagnostics API, include the `<diagnostics.h>` header file in your application:

    ```cpp
    #include <diagnostics.h>
    ```

## Crash reports

> Diagnostics API allows to read the crash reports in case the process in the system fails. To do so, it is necessary to register the callback that will be called when the crash report is created:

Reviewer: Suggestion:

Diagnostics API allows you to read the crash reports in case the process in the system fails. To do so, you must register the callback that will be called when the crash report is created:

```cpp
void crash_callback(diagnostics_ctx_h ctx, void *user_data)
{
    [...]
}

int register_callback(void *user_data)
{
    return diagnostics_set_notification_cb(crash_callback, user_data);
}
```

> [!NOTE]
> To deregister the callback use:
> ```
> diagnostics_unset_notification_cb();
> ```

> In case a new crash report is created, callback will be called. To read the content of the crash report use `diagnostics_get_data(...)` function.

Reviewer: Please remove the word "function":

In case a new crash report is created, callback is called. To read the content of the crash report use `diagnostics_get_data(...)`:

```cpp

> void crash_callback(diagnostics_ctx_h ctx, void *user_data)

Author: Nowhere. user_data is what the user gave during callback registration. For simplicity, the example does not show that this data can be used. Should I change it?

> void crash_callback(diagnostics_ctx_h ctx, void *user_data)

Reviewer 2: I was just to check the any case of error in the code. If it is not an error or typo, it is good to keep current code.

{
    diagnostics_data_h data;
    const char *params[] = {"cs_info_json"};

    int ret = diagnostics_get_data(ctx, params, 1, &data);
    if (ret != DIAGNOSTICS_ERROR_NONE)
        return;

    [...]
}
```

> By the `params` argument it is possible to specify which data should be read from the crash report. Currently the proper values are:

Reviewer: Suggest rephrasing to:

Using the `params` argument it is possible to specify, which data must be read from the crash report. Currently, the proper values are:

> -   `"cs_info_json"` - JSON report will be returned, which contains information about crashed process (callstack, mapped memory regions, etc.)
> -   `"cs_full"` - Full crash report ZIP archive will be collected.
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-   `"cs_info_json": JSON report is returned, which contains information about crashed process (callstack, mapped memory regions, and so on).
-   `"cs_full"`: Full crash report ZIP archive is collected.
```

> The obtained data will be associated with the `data` Diagnostics handler. To read the data content it is necessary to use `diagnostics_data_read()` function.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The obtained data is associated with the `data` Diagnostics handler. To read the data content, you must use `diagnostics_data_read()`:
```

```cpp
void crash_callback(diagnostics_ctx_h ctx, void *user_data)
{
    diagnostics_data_h data;
    const char *params[] = {"cs_info_json"};

    int ret = diagnostics_get_data(ctx, params, 1, &data);
    if (ret != DIAGNOSTICS_ERROR_NONE)
        return;

    char buff[0x1000];
    int timeout_ms = 0;
    size_t bytes_read;

    for (;;) {
        ret = diagnostics_data_read(data, buff, sizeof(buff), timeout_ms, &bytes_read);
        if (ret == DIAGNOSTICS_ERROR_TRY_AGAIN)
            continue;

        if (ret != DIAGNOSTICS_ERROR_NONE)
            break; // error occured

        if (bytes_read == 0)
            break; // no more data to read

        fwrite(buff, 1, bytes_read, stdout); // write received data to the STDOUT
    }
}
```

## Diagnostic data request

Diagnostics API can be used to request data from other application or service - especially diagnostic data that for various reasons cannot or should not be saved in logs e.g.:

-   binary or in custom format data,
-   large volume data,
-   reports that are time-consuming to create,

> -   etc.

Reviewer: Suggest rephrasing to:

Diagnostics API can be used to request data from other application or service, especially for the diagnostic data that for various reasons cannot or must not be saved in the logs, such as binary or in custom format data, large volume data, reports that are time-consuming to create, and so on.

> To do so, it is necessary to call `diagnostics_request_client_data()` function. The `client_id` variable should be the id of the process that supports Diagnostics API requests.

Reviewer: Suggest rephrasing to:

To do so, you must call `diagnostics_request_client_data()`. The `client_id` variable must be the id of the process that supports Diagnostics API requests:

```cpp
void request_data()
{
    const char *client_id = "org.tizen.some_service";
    diagnostics_data_h data;
    const char *params[] = {"custom_parameter"};

    int ret = diagnostics_request_client_data(client_id, params, 1, &data);
    if (ret != DIAGNOSTICS_ERROR_NONE)
        return;

    char buff[0x1000];
    int timeout_ms = 0;
    size_t bytes_read;

    for (;;) {
        ret = diagnostics_data_read(data, buff, sizeof(buff), timeout_ms, &bytes_read);
        if (ret == DIAGNOSTICS_ERROR_TRY_AGAIN)
            continue;

        if (ret != DIAGNOSTICS_ERROR_NONE)
            break; // error occured

        if (bytes_read == 0)
            break; // no more data to read

        fwrite(buff, 1, bytes_read, stdout); // write received data to the STDOUT
    }
}
```

> If `diagnostics_request_client_data()` returns no error, the obtained data can be read by `diagnostics_read_data()` function.

Reviewer: Suggestion to avoid negative phrase:

If `diagnostics_request_client_data()` returns successfully, the obtained data can be read by `diagnostics_read_data()`.
